---
layout: post
title: "The importance of mastering your keyboard"
description: ""
categories: []
tags: []
thumbnail:
---

> Vietnamese in next post.
> Tiếng Việt trong bài post tiếp theo.

> Through my first 5 years of working, I have seen many types of team leader.
> Some are nice, some aren't. There are some actions (which you will see in this post)
> I personally think they can form a bad team leader.
> They are based my experience and they are just my personal point of view.
> Take it easy, don’t be too serious and enjoy reading!

By **Team leader**, I mean the Software Engineer team leader, who directly manages a team from 2 to 10 people
so these things may not be true for all cases.

# Start work discussion right after you see your team members

You may be surprised!
Yeah, office is a place to work, not to play.
You and your team, of course, come to the office to work.
Thus, why the hell shouldn't we start the standup (or other work discussion) immediately after your team members have come?

Imagine that you are the guy who have spent one hour or more dealing with traffic jam, the dirt and the bad air quality
(yeah, traffic condition in Vietnam is terrible).
You come to the office and you are immediately asked for the progress of the tasks that you are working on, the bugs that you are facing.
What you gonna do?
Your mind is still full with all the annoying stuff on the street, your coffee has not been ready yet, your laptop has not turned on yet,
your have not checked your notes/issues yet, and you have no idea what you are going to talk. How do you feel?

Everybody needs a small gap time after traveling to refresh their mind.
Always give your team members time to wash their faces, make their coffee, get their brain ready and prepare for the work
even if he comes a bit late (except in case of urgent issues)! Usually at least 5-10 minutes is a suitable time.

# Start a working day by a complain

Right! Everybody knows this is bad. However, somebody just don't mind avoiding it.

You caught some bugs caused by the other ones.
You found that some of your team members didn't follow exactly what you said.
You noticed that somebody didn't implement the correct requirements.
You know that your team members did a silly thing.
And you feel upset, you feel angry.
And then you start complaining about all those problems right when you see your team members coming to the office.
Congratulation! You behave like an asshole.

**Start work discussion right after you see your team members** is bad, but **Start a working day by a complain** is much worse.

Bugs are unavoidable. Nobody wants their code to have bugs.
Nobody wants to start their day by hearing a complain.
Do you want that? Of course, not.
Never ever do that. Save your complains to later. Start by complaining also means that you haven’t taken a serious look into the root cause of those problems. Sometimes, maybe you expressed the requirements incorrectly or you didn’t tell clearly what you wanted them to do. Stop and analyze the problems before making any complains, especially at the beginning of the day.

# Micro-Management

> If I was the above guy, I would hit the client real hard

And the same for all of us! 😂

It's REALLY REALLY REALLY hard to think and code when there is an annoying guy standing behind you,
pointing to your screen, talking continuously and teaching you how to do things. Nobody wants that.
We are adults, we need the time and space to think, we don't want a guy acting as our parents behind
us.

As a leader, what you need to care is the result, not every single moment.

Talking about **Micro Management**, I also feel that **Pair Programming**

# You usually have the problem with estimating

# You are never satisfied by the work of your team members

# You can not get agreement with your team members

> Ok! Whatever, just do whatever you want. I don't care!
> Ok! Whatever, this is good and you have to follow this.

If you have said the above things to your team members, you are going to lose them soon. Congratulation!

I have seen somebody debating with their team members and ended up with something like the above sentences. That simply means you lack one of the most important skill of a leader. If your idea/point of debate is right, it means you don't have the necessary persuading skill to explain it to the other people. If your idea is wrong (maybe it will take time for you to realize), it means are fucked off. You don't listen to the other people and just want them to do whatever you said. Either way, you have failed as a leader position.

# You team members simply accept whatever you say

This is somewhat the consequences of the above one.

Debating is good in many manners. If helps you find the best solution. However, if the rate of debating decreases by the time, if a team member goes from willing to debate to simply accept whatever you said, you have failed already. If this the case, it's quite hard to find a way to bring back their interest in debating and you are going to lose them soon. They are actually working for money, not for interest!

If you are in this case, my suggestion, of course, is to fix this ASAP, try to listen to them in every discussion. However, also prepare for a future where you have to hire other guys.

# You expect your people to be productive every day

Yeah, right! Developers are human, not machine. Even the machine can behave badly sometimes (in case of hardware failure) so you cannot expect your team members to be 100% productive every day. Software engineering is a specialized job, which uses a lot of brain energy. And yeah, our brain cannot always be in good mood. It could be a personal problem with their family, a health problem or an allergic issue with the things they ate or drank. Even if they are in a good health condition, they can only be productive for about 80% of their working days. That means, for a 5-day-working week, they can be fully productive for about 4 days.

It is a big mistake in management if you always plan for a week with the work that requires maximum velocity of your team. Always give a buffer time for your team. Things get worse when you have already done the planning wrong and then keep forcing the team to meet that deadline, keep asking them why they didn’t spend the full day to work on those things.

They gonna leave you soon! 😇

**You expect everybody to have the same level with you**
