---
layout: post
title: "Mistakes of a Software Engineer - Favor NoSQL over SQL? - Part 2"
description: ""
categories: [misc]
tags: []
thumbnail:
---

> Part 1 [Mistakes of a Software Engineer - Favor NoSQL over SQL - Part 1]({%post_url 2021-05-03-mistakes-of-software-developer-favor-nosql-over-sql-part-1%}) 

# There is nothing called Schemaless

One argument that people usually make about NoSQL is the flexibility in schema designing. They
are Schemaless databases and very similar to objects in programming language. They dynamic schema is very
powerful and can support several different use cases, not limited like what SQL provides. You can
simply throw your objects into it and do anything you want.

> Is it really true?  
> For me, it's **NOT**.

There is nothing called Schemaless. The schema just moves from the Database level to Application level.
For Document databases, you are actually using implicit data schema model (compare to explicit data
schema in SQL). Instead of letting the database handle the schema validation, you will have to do it 
yourself in Application code.
- Some databases support simple schema validation. However, none of them are as optimal as what 
  SQL provides. You are limited to just some basic data types (string, number, boolean,...) while 
  SQL offers a wide range of different data types for different use case (for example: varchar, nvarchar 
  text,... just for string data). Working with pre-defined data type is always easier and more performant.
- In case you handle the schema by yourself, it may be ok if you use a static-typed programming language
  (like C#). However, if you are developing your application using Nodejs, Ruby, PHP,... (which is quite
  common for Startup companies), you have maintain another layer of schema validation in your application
  because the data is just runtime objects.

Schema migration is also another problem. 

